**TITLE: Initial treatment choices for long term remission of chronic
insomnia disorder in adults: a systematic review and network
meta-analysis　　**

AUTHOR: Yuki Furukawa, Masatsugu Sakata, Toshi A. Furukawa, Orestis
Efthimiou, Michael Perlis


# **1. PROTOCOL**

The protocol was prospectively registered in PROSPERO (CRD42023450720).
Below is the protocol as of 20 January 2024.

> First draft: 20 September 2023
>
> Last edited: 20 January 2024

**Title: Initial treatment choices for insomnia disorder in adults: a
protocol for a systematic review and network meta-analysis　**

**REVIEW QUESTION**

What are the long-term comparative efficacy and acceptability of
cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia, pharmacotherapy, and their
combination when used as the initial treatment for insomnia disorder in
adults?

**BACKGROUND**

Insomnia is common and disabling.(Roth et al., 2011) Meta-analyses of
randomized controlled trials have shown the effectiveness of cognitive
behavioral therapy for insomnia(Furukawa et al., 2024) and some
pharmacotherapies.(De_Crescenzo et al., 2022) A recent network
meta-analysis (NMA) suggested potential superiority of CBT-I over
pharmacotherapies and their combination over pharmacotherapies both at
the end of the acute phase treatment and at follow-up(Zhang et al.,
2022) However, the NMA included hypnotic-resistant insomniacs and this
does not answer the clinical question of which treatment strategy to
choose when starting to treat medication-naïve insomnia. In this study,
we will explore the relative efficacy and acceptability of CBT-I,
pharmacotherapy, and their combination as the initial treatment choice
with the use of NMA, focusing on trials that randomized treatment-naïve
insomniacs only.

**METHODS**

We will follow the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and
Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guideline extension for NMA.(Hutton et al., 2015)
We will register the study protocol on PROSPERO.

**Data sources**

**Criteria for considering studies for this review**

***Study design***

We will include all randomized controlled trials that compared CBT-I,
pharmacotherapies, or their combination against each other in the
treatment of hypnotic-free adults with chronic insomnia.

***Participants***

We will include studies of patients of both genders aged 18 years or
older with insomnia either diagnosed according to formal diagnostic
criteria (such as the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, the International Classification of Diseases or the
International Classification of Sleep Disorders) or judged so by
clinical experts (e.g. presence of significant symptoms). The criteria
need to include significant distress or daytime impairment. The effect
of including studies without a formal diagnosis of insomnia will be
tested in a sensitivity analysis. We will include patients with
psychiatric or physical comorbidities. The effect of including such
studies will be examined in a sensitivity analysis.

We will exclude trials if patients currently using prescription or
over-the-counter sleep medications were included. We will include
studies if patients discontinued the medications for a certain period
before randomization.

***Interventions and controls***

We regard CBT-I as a psychotherapy involving any one of the following
effective components: cognitive restructuring for insomnia, third wave
components for insomnia(mindfulness and acceptance and commitment
therapy), sleep restriction or stimulus control.(Furukawa et al., 2024)
We will include drugs that were proven to be effective in the recent
NMA. (benzodiazepines, doxylamine, eszopiclone, lemborexant,
seltorexant, suvorexant, trazodone, zaleplon, zolpidem, zopiclone)
(De_Crescenzo et al., 2022) Where multiple arms are reported in a single
trial, we will include only the relevant arms.

**Search methods for identification of studies**

We will carry out a comprehensive literature search in PubMed, Cochrane
Central Register of Controlled Trials and PsycINFO. We will use a
combination of index and free terms of psychological treatments and
insomnia with filters for randomized clinical trials. We will also
search WHO International Clinical Trials Registry Platform. We will
impose no date, language or publication status restriction. We will
check the reference lists of identified studies and review articles for
additional potentially eligible records.

**TABLE 3 Search strings for PubMed, Cochrane Central Register of
Controlled Trials and PsycINFO**

+--------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| Da     | Search strings                                              |
| tabase |                                                             |
+========+=============================================================+
| PubMed | ( \"psychotherapy\"\[Mesh\] OR \"psychotherap\*\"\[All      |
|        | Fields\] OR \"cognitive behavioural therapy\"\[All Fields\] |
|        | OR \"cognitive behavioral therapy\"\[All Fields\] OR        |
|        | \"CBT\"\[All Fields\] OR \"CBTI\"\[All Fields\] OR          |
|        | \"CBT-I\"\[All Fields\] OR \"cognitive therapy\"\[All       |
|        | Fields\] OR \"behavioural therapy\"\[All Fields\] OR        |
|        | \"behavioral therapy\"\[All Fields\] OR \"cognitive         |
|        | restructuring\"\[All Fields\] OR \"third wave\"\[All        |
|        | Fields\] OR \"mindfulness\"\[All Fields\] OR \"acceptance   |
|        | and commitment\"\[All Fields\] OR \"sleep                   |
|        | restriction\"\[All Fields\] OR \"stimulus control\"\[All    |
|        | Fields\] )                                                  |
|        |                                                             |
|        | AND                                                         |
|        |                                                             |
|        | (\"hypnotic\"\[All Fields\] OR \"sleep medication\"\[All    |
|        | Fields\] OR \"benzodiazepines\"\[Mesh\] OR                  |
|        | \"benzodiazepine\"\[All Fields\] OR \"brotizolam\"\[All     |
|        | Fields\] OR \"diazepam\"\[All Fields\] OR                   |
|        | \"estazolam\"\[All Fields\] OR \"flunitrazepam\"\[All       |
|        | Fields\] OR \"flurazepam\"\[All Fields\] OR                 |
|        | \"haloxazolam\"\[All Fields\] OR \"loprazolam\"\[All        |
|        | Fields\] OR \"lorazepam\"\[All Fields\] OR                  |
|        | \"lormetazepam\"\[All Fields\] OR \"nimetazepam\"\[All      |
|        | Fields\] OR \"nitrazepam\"\[All Fields\] OR                 |
|        | \"quazepam\"\[All Fields\] OR \"rilmazafone\"\[All Fields\] |
|        | OR \"temazepam\"\[All Fields\] OR \"triazolam\"\[All        |
|        | Fields\] OR \"trazodone\"\[All Fields\] OR                  |
|        | \"eszopiclone\"\[All Fields\] OR \"zopiclone\"\[All         |
|        | Fields\] OR \"doxylamine\"\[All Fields\] OR                 |
|        | \"zolpidem\"\[All Fields\] OR \"seltorexant\"\[All Fields\] |
|        | OR \"lemborexant\"\[All Fields\] OR \"suvorexant\"\[All     |
|        | Fields\] OR \"zaleplon\"\[All Fields\] )                    |
|        |                                                             |
|        | AND                                                         |
|        |                                                             |
|        | (\"sleep initiation and maintenance disorders\"\[Mesh\] OR  |
|        | \"insomnia\"\[All Fields\] )                                |
|        |                                                             |
|        | AND                                                         |
|        |                                                             |
|        | (\"randomized controlled trial\"\[pt\] OR \"controlled      |
|        | clinical trial\"\[pt\] OR randomized\[tiab\] OR             |
|        | placebo\[tiab\] OR \"clinical trials as                     |
|        | topic\"\[Mesh:NoExp\] OR randomly\[tiab\] OR trial\[ti\]    |
|        | NOT (animals\[Mesh\] NOT humans\[Mesh\]))                   |
+--------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| Co     | (\[mh psychotherapy\] OR psychotherap\* OR \"cognitive      |
| chrane | behavioural therapy\" OR \"cognitive behavioral therapy\"   |
| C      | OR CBT OR CBTI OR CBT-I OR \"cognitive therapy\" OR         |
| entral | \"behavioural therapy\" OR \"behavioral therapy\" OR        |
| Re     | \"cognitive restructuring\" OR \"third wave\" OR            |
| gister | mindfulness OR \"acceptance and commitment\" OR \"sleep     |
| of     | restriction\" OR \"stimulus control\")                      |
| Cont   |                                                             |
| rolled | AND                                                         |
| Trials |                                                             |
|        | (hypnotic OR \"sleep medication\" OR \[mh benzodiazepines\] |
|        | OR benzodiazepine OR brotizolam OR diazepam OR estazolam OR |
|        | flunitrazepam OR flurazepam OR haloxazolam OR loprazolam OR |
|        | lorazepam OR lormetazepam OR nimetazepam OR nitrazepam OR   |
|        | quazepam OR rilmazafone OR temazepam OR triazolam OR        |
|        | trazodone OR eszopiclone OR zopiclone OR doxylamine OR      |
|        | zolpidem OR seltorexant OR lemborexant OR suvorexant OR     |
|        | zaleplon)                                                   |
|        |                                                             |
|        | AND                                                         |
|        |                                                             |
|        | (\[mh \"sleep initiation and maintenance disorders\"\] OR   |
|        | insomnia)                                                   |
+--------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| Ps     | ((MH psychotherapy+) OR psychotherap\* OR \"cognitive       |
| ycINFO | behavioural therapy\" OR \"cognitive behavioral therapy\"   |
| via    | OR CBT OR CBTI OR CBT-I OR \"cognitive therapy\" OR         |
| Ebsco  | \"behavioural therapy\" OR \"behavioral therapy\" OR        |
|        | \"cognitive restructuring\" OR \"third wave\" OR            |
|        | mindfulness OR \"acceptance and commitment\" OR \"sleep     |
|        | restriction\" OR \"stimulus control\")                      |
|        |                                                             |
|        | AND                                                         |
|        |                                                             |
|        | (hypnotic OR \"sleep medication\" OR (MH benzodiazepines+)  |
|        | OR benzodiazepine OR brotizolam OR diazepam OR estazolam OR |
|        | flunitrazepam OR flurazepam OR haloxazolam OR loprazolam OR |
|        | lorazepam OR lormetazepam OR nimetazepam OR nitrazepam OR   |
|        | quazepam OR rilmazafone OR temazepam OR triazolam OR        |
|        | trazodone OR eszopiclone OR zopiclone OR doxylamine OR      |
|        | zolpidem OR seltorexant OR lemborexant OR suvorexant OR     |
|        | zaleplon)                                                   |
|        |                                                             |
|        | AND                                                         |
|        |                                                             |
|        | ((MH \"sleep initiation and maintenance disorders+\") OR    |
|        | insomnia)                                                   |
|        |                                                             |
|        | AND                                                         |
|        |                                                             |
|        | (MH randomized controlled trials OR MH double-blind studies |
|        | OR MH single-blind studies OR MH random assignment OR MH    |
|        | pretest-posttest design OR MH cluster sample OR TI          |
|        | (randomised OR randomized) OR AB (random\*) OR TI (trial)   |
|        | OR (MH (sample size) AND AB (assigned OR allocated OR       |
|        | control)) OR MH (placebos) OR PT (randomized controlled     |
|        | trial) OR AB (control W5 group) OR MH (crossover design) OR |
|        | MH (comparative studies) OR AB (cluster W3 RCT)) NOT ((MH   |
|        | animals+ OR MH animal studies OR TI (animal model\*)) NOT   |
|        | MH human)                                                   |
+--------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| WHO    | (psychotherap\* OR \"cognitive behavioural therapy\" OR     |
| I      | \"cognitive behavioral therapy\" OR \"CBT\" OR \"CBTI\" OR  |
| nterna | \"CBT-I\" OR \"cognitive therapy\" OR \"behavioural         |
| tional | therapy\" OR \"behavioral therapy\" OR \"cognitive          |
| Cl     | restructuring\" OR \"third wave\" OR mindfulness OR         |
| inical | \"acceptance and commitment\" OR \"sleep restriction\" OR   |
| Trials | \"stimulus control\")                                       |
| Re     |                                                             |
| gistry | AND                                                         |
| Pl     |                                                             |
| atform | (hypnotic OR \"sleep medication\" OR benzodiazepines OR     |
|        | benzodiazepine OR brotizolam OR diazepam OR estazolam OR    |
|        | flunitrazepam OR flurazepam OR haloxazolam OR loprazolam OR |
|        | lorazepam OR lormetazepam OR nimetazepam OR nitrazepam OR   |
|        | quazepam OR rilmazafone OR temazepam OR triazolam OR        |
|        | trazodone OR eszopiclone OR zopiclone OR doxylamine OR      |
|        | zolpidem OR seltorexant OR lemborexant OR suvorexant OR     |
|        | zaleplon)                                                   |
|        |                                                             |
|        | AND                                                         |
|        |                                                             |
|        | (\"sleep initiation and maintenance disorders \" OR         |
|        | insomnia)                                                   |
+--------+-------------------------------------------------------------+

**Data collection and analysis**

**Selection of studies**

Two review authors will independently screen titles and abstracts of all
the potential studies we identify as a result of the search and code
them as 'retrieve' or 'do not retrieve'. We will retrieve the full text
study reports/publications and two review authors will independently
screen the full text and identify studies for inclusion and identify and
record reasons for exclusion of the ineligible studies. We will resolve
any disagreement through discussion or, if required, we will consult a
third reviewer. We will identify publications from the same study so
that each study rather than each report is the unit of analysis in the
review. We will record the selection process in sufficient detail to
complete a PRISMA flow diagram.

**Data items**

Two review authors will extract independently data from the included
studies. Any disagreement will be resolved through discussion, or
discussed with a third person if necessary. We will abstract the
following information.

***1. Characteristics of the studies***

Name of the study, year of publication, country, study site (single or
multi-center), recruitment, population characteristics (mean age, number
of women, definition of insomnia), intervention, outcomes (scale used
for the primary outcome)

***2. Risk of bias***

We will use Cochrane Risk of Bias 2.0 tool (RoB2) (Sterne et al., 2019)
to assess the risk of bias of the primary outcome. We will report the
inter-rater agreement in terms of percentage agreement and kappa.

***3. Data to calculate effect sizes***

We will extract data to calculate effect sizes (the number of patients
randomized to each arm, the number of patients assessed, the number of
remitters, the scale used, the mean, standard deviation and the number
assessed for continuous outcomes) When only change from baseline to
endpoint is reported for continuous outcomes, we will use it instead of
endpoint mean.

**Primary outcome and secondary outcomes**

The primary outcome

1\. Efficacy at long-term follow-up. (Remission defined as reaching a
satisfactory state at endpoint measured by any validated self-reported
scale. Dichotomous. Longest follow-up between 3 to 12 months)

Secondary outcomes are as follows;

2\. Acceptability: dropouts for any reason at long-term follow-up
(dichotomous)

3\. Sleep diary measures at long-term follow-up (continuous)

3.1. Sleep efficiency at long-term follow-up (%)

3.2. Total sleep time at long-term follow-up (minutes)

3.3. Sleep latency at long-term follow-up (minutes)

3.4. Wake after sleep onset at long-term follow-up (minutes)

4\. Efficacy at long-term follow-up (continuous)

5\. Efficacy at post-treatment: remission defined as reaching a
satisfactory state at endpoint measured by any validated self-reported
scale (dichotomous)

6\. Acceptability: dropouts for any reason at post-treatment
(dichotomous)

7\. Sleep diary measures at post-treatment (continuous)

7.1. Sleep efficiency at post-treatment (%)

7.2. Total sleep time at post-treatment (minutes)

7.3. Sleep latency at post-treatment (minutes)

7.4. Wake after sleep onset at post-treatment (minutes)

8\. Efficacy at post-treatment (continuous)

Intention-to-treat analysis will be prioritized whenever available. We
will use the number of participants randomized as the denominator for
dichotomous outcomes. We will use odds ratio for dichotomous outcomes,
mean difference for continuous outcomes expressed in minutes and
percent.

**Hierarchy of outcome measures**

For efficacy, we will prioritize the remission using the Insomnia
Severity Index (7 or less points at endpoint) and its imputed number. If
it is not reported, we will use the following scales in this order: the
remission using the Sleep Condition Indicator (17 or more points at
endpoint); the remission using the Functional Outcomes of Sleep
Questionnaire-10 (18 or more points at endpoint), and then its imputed
number; remission using the Epworth Sleepiness Scale (10 or less points
at endpoint), and then its imputed number; remission using the
Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (5 or less points at endpoint), and then
its imputed number; remission using the Athens Insomnia Scale (5 or less
points at endpoint), and then its imputed number; remission using any
other validated self-reported scales; remission using sleep diary
measures (SE larger than 85% at endpoint; WASO less than 30 minutes at
endpoint; SL less than 30 minutes at endpoint) and its imputed number.

When any of the measure is reported using another definition of
remission than stated above, we will use the definition stated by the
authors. When any of the measure is reported only in continuous values,
we will impute remission using mean and standard deviation.

**Statistical analysis**

We will examine transitivity, an important underlying assumption of the
network meta-analysis model, by creating a table of important trial and
patient characteristics to see if potential effect modifiers
(publication year, mean age, baseline severity) are similarly
distributed among treatment comparisons. If we deem transitivity to be a
plausible assumption, we will proceed with performing a network
meta-analysis. Given the expected clinical and methodological
heterogeneity of treatment effects among the studies, we will use the
random-effects model, assuming a common heterogeneity parameter across
the network.

Lack of transitivity may manifest as inconsistency in the network, in
case there are closed loops. We will check for consistency using by
comparing direct and indirect estimates and using global consistency
test (design-by-treatment)(White et al., 2012). If the prerequisites of
network meta-analysis are not met, or in case of large unexplained
inconsistency, we will only present direct (i.e. from pairwise
meta-analyses) and indirect evidence for each treatment comparison.

We will perform all analyses in R using *netmeta* package(Rücker et al.,
2020) to conduct network meta-analysis and *meta* package(Balduzzi et
al., 2019) to assess the reporting bias.

**Certainty of evidence**

We will assess the certainty of evidence in network estimates of the
primary outcome using CINeMA.(Nikolakopoulou et al., 2020)

**Publication bias**

We will assess the presence of small study effects, including
publication bias, in the evidence set with ten or more trials by
examining asymmetry in the contour-enhanced funnel plots.

**Sensitivity analyses**

1\. Excluding studies without formal diagnosis of insomnia

2\. Excluding studies focusing on patients with comorbidities (both
physical and psychological)

3\. Excluding studies with overall high dropout rate (20% or more)

4\. Excluding studies at high overall risk of bias

**Patient and public involvement**

There was no patient or public involvement in the development of this
manuscript.

**Funding**

Self-funded

**Declaration of interests**

YF has received consultancy fee from Panasonic outside the submitted
work.

MS reports personal fees from SONY outside the submitted work.

TAF reports personal fees from Boehringer-Ingelheim, DT Axis, Kyoto
University Original, Shionogi and SONY, and a grant from Shionogi,
outside the submitted work; In addition, TAF has patents 2020-548587 and
2022-082495 pending, and intellectual properties for Kokoro-app licensed
to Mitsubishi-Tanabe.

MP wrote treatment manuals and books for CBT-I, teaches CBT-I, and is a
founder of Hypknowledge LLC.

**Acknowledgements**

The views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of affiliated organizations.

**Registration**

We will register the study protocol on PROSPERO.

**REFERENCE**

Balduzzi S, Rücker G, Schwarzer G. How to perform a meta-analysis with
R: a practical tutorial. Évid Based Ment Heal 2019;22:153.
<https://doi.org/10.1136/ebmental-2019-300117>.

De Crescenzo F, D'Alò GL, Ostinelli EG, Ciabattini M, Franco VD,
Watanabe N, et al. Comparative effects of pharmacological interventions
for the acute and long-term management of insomnia disorder in adults: a
systematic review and network meta-analysis. Lancet 2022;400:170--84.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/s0140-6736(22)00878-9>.

Furukawa Y, Sakata M, Yamamoto R, Nakajima S, Kikuchi S, Inoue M, et al.
Components and Delivery Formats of Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for
Chronic Insomnia in Adults. JAMA Psychiatry 2024;81.
<https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2023.5060>.

Hutton B, Salanti G, Caldwell DM, Chaimani A, Schmid CH, Cameron C, et
al. The PRISMA Extension Statement for Reporting of Systematic Reviews
Incorporating Network Meta-analyses of Health Care Interventions:
Checklist and Explanations. Ann Intern Med 2015;162:777--84.
<https://doi.org/10.7326/m14-2385>.

Nikolakopoulou A, Higgins JPT, Papakonstantinou T, Chaimani A, Giovane
CD, Egger M, et al. CINeMA: An approach for assessing confidence in the
results of a network meta-analysis. Plos Med 2020;17:e1003082.
<https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1003082>.

Roth T, Coulouvrat C, Hajak G, Lakoma MD, Sampson NA, Shahly V, et al.
Prevalence and Perceived Health Associated with Insomnia Based on
DSM-IV-TR; International Statistical Classification of Diseases and
Related Health Problems, Tenth Revision; and Research Diagnostic
Criteria/International Classification of Sleep Disorders, Second Edition
Criteria: Results from the America Insomnia Survey. Biol Psychiat
2011;69:592--600. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2010.10.023>.

Rücker G, Krahn U, König J, Efthimiou O, Schwarzer G. netmeta: Network
Meta-Analysis using Frequentist Methods. 2020.

Sterne JA, Savović J, Page MJ, Elbers RG, Blencowe NS, Boutron I, et al.
RoB 2: a revised tool for assessing risk of bias in randomised trials.
Bmj 2019;366:l4898. <https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.l4898>.

White IR, Barrett JK, Jackson D, Higgins JPT. Consistency and
inconsistency in network meta‐analysis: model estimation using
multivariate meta‐regression. Res Synth Methods 2012;3:111--25.
<https://doi.org/10.1002/jrsm.1045>.

Zhang Y, Ren R, Yang L, Zhang H, Shi Y, Shi J, et al. Comparative
efficacy and acceptability of psychotherapies, pharmacotherapies, and
their combination for the treatment of adult insomnia: A systematic
review and network meta-analysis. Sleep Med Rev 2022;65:101687.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.smrv.2022.101687>.

**\
Amendments**

April 10, 2024. We decided to conduct two post-hoc sensitivity analyses
to test the influence of arm definitions.

**Additional table. Interventions**

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Intervention          Description
  --------------------- -------------------------------------------------
  Cognitive components  

  Cognitive             Skills to identify, challenge and change
  restructuring         unrealistic beliefs about sleep that may disturb
                        sleep. Sometimes simply called cognitive therapy.

  Third wave components Mindfulness and acceptance and commitment
                        therapy. Mindfulness is a form of meditation
                        emphasizing a non-judgmental state of heightened
                        or complete awareness of one's thoughts,
                        emotions, or experiences on a moment-to-moment
                        basis. Acceptance and commitment therapy focuses
                        on accepting the feelings and thoughts associated
                        with insomnia through value-based behaviors.

  Behavioral components 

  Sleep restriction     Skills to improve sleep by limiting time in bed.
                        First, time in bed is restricted to the average
                        sleep duration and then it is increased or
                        decreased depending on sleep efficiency.

  Stimulus control      Skills to re-associate the bed with sleep.
                        Patients are instructed to; wake up at the same
                        time every morning, refrain from daytime napping,
                        go to bed only when sleepy, get out of bed when
                        unable to sleep, and use the bed/bedroom for
                        sleep and sex only.
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
